---
layout: default
title: A Visitor From the Past
---

### A Visitor From the Past

Balaji had just purchased a copy of the Valadi Times for the princely sum of 25 naye paise from the solitary newsstand cum bookstall in Valadi, a sleepy, dusty, quaint town, only slightly larger than a village, but small enough that there were no unfamiliar faces, and a brisk thirty minute walk sufficient to span any given dimension of the town. Valadi was situated on a slight elevation from the surrounding plains, which gave its residents sweeping panoramic views of the barren countryside, in stark contrast to the verdant look of the town itself.
	
The Valadi Times was more pamphlet than newspaper, usually serving packaging needs more than informational ones. The reasons were obvious enough. Firstly, news spread fast in the languidly Lilliputian town, since the inhabitants, not being of the overzealously industrious variety, were blessed with far more time on their hands than could be expended on routine daily business. If time were to replace money as the medium of exchange one bizarre day, Valadi would have been as coveted and sought after as Beverly Hills, so temporally endowed were its residents. The second reason, also evident enough, was that not much newsworthy transpired with sufficient regularity to fill all of the four sheets that the Times struggled to fill. Word of mouth being the preferred mode of advertising (as in the kulfi vendor's signature vociferation or the vegetable seller╒s rustic bellow), advertisements could not be reliably employed to fill large tracts of vacant newsprint. So the editor, the statuesquely lumbering,  ingeniously resourceful Chinna Kannan Das (affectionately known as CKD), resorted to such techniques as preposterously large font sizes, weekly (and sometimes monthly and quarterly) editions, full page photographs of indigenous scenes to savor such as bovine roadblocks, pint-sized urchins having a swim in the local river (little more than a ditch), monsoonal wrath savagely wreaking havoc upon antediluvian drainage systems, phlegmatic residents enjoying leisurely coffee and upumma at the sole Udipi joint in town, &C. &C.

The intelligent reader would have surmised by now that Balaji was looking for something of evidently grave and portentous import in the pages of the Times, for him to have parted with half the wealth on his person in exchange for glorified wrapping paper. We leave it to readers' wily imagination for now as to the specifics of the information being so eagerly sought. Suffice to say that his heart throbbed wildly, and his face flushed crimson upon perusing a little section in page three of the rag, sandwiched between an article on the district MP's grand fanfare filled visit to said town, and an out-of-focus photograph of a handful of residents leading a protest march against garbage clearing delays, which it must be said were vitiating the atmosphere of the town, known for its general lack of pollution and fresh air.

Balaji was an unremarkable man of average height, clad in an ancient checked shirt and patched lungi, lean of frame, with a narrow gaunt face, broad forehead, with a large parrot-like nose and crooked teeth, sporting a rather scruffy and untamed beard, which was the cause of frequent fits of uncontrolled itching. He was the type that you would be liable to find in any average Indian town, sipping tea by the roadside or riding a bicycle, blending in like a chameleon with the environment, his presence barely registering a blip on the radar of consciousness of passers-by. Temperamentally, he was of the phlegmatic variety, not given to wild oscillations of emotion. Therefore, his reaction to the 2 x 4 square in the Times was entirely out of character and would have caused a fair degree of startlement among those who knew him well. If there was one quality this below average Joe could lay claim to, it was his keen skills of observation, which were nearly as impressive as what Mr. Holmes could bring to bear in his Victorian heyday. 

Balaji's mind presently flashed back to a different age, when he was a scrawny and unkempt schoolboy, in particular to a noteworthy incident from his childhood. Krishnaswamy Iyengar better known as Kichu was Balaji's nemesis ever since the day he embarked on his bitterly futile quest for knowledge. Kichu was in every department Balaji's superior by thumping margins - be it in looks, height, physique, intelligence, scholastic achievement, athletic achievement, school popularity, popularity among the distaff, yada yada yada. Kichu was a mirror in which Balaji saw daily, his own failures and inadequacies, and this led to a resentment that spread slowly but surely, like a gangrene, until it had engulfed and jaundiced Balaji's entire being. Slow roasting thus under the flames of envy, Balaji's simmering feelings one day overflowed and led to a fiery argument with Kichu over the merest of trifles. Verbal jousting quickly degenerated into fisticuffs, and in the ensuing scuffle, Balaji, as deranged as a chili-fed lunatic elephant, bit off a chunk of Kichu's left ear. Poignantly pitiful howls. Agonizingly anguished screams. Fainting forthwith,  Kichu was rushed by good Samaritans to the weather-beaten Valadi Municipal Hospital, whereupon his tattered ear was sewn up, leaving behind a humiliating scar, like a fruit out of which a choice bite had been taken. Unable to bear this mortification, this appalling alteration to his auricular profile, and the shattering of his aura of invincibility, Kichu subsequently persuaded his family to take leave of  Valadi for the anonymity of larger settlements, where the accident could contrivably be explained away as a birth deformity. As for Balaji, this heinous and barbaric act meant summary punishment in the form of immediate dismissal from school, which price was a bargain for the restoration of his severely damaged self-esteem. Subsequent years had passed in mundanely commonplace fashion, with no incident as worthy of remembrance as the aforementioned brawl. Having had his schooling thus cut short, Balaji had grown up as an odds and ends kind of man, earning his living through varieties of menial labor. Presently he was engaged as a constable cum driver at the local police station.

Flash forward in time to the present moment, when Balaji had chanced to overhear a street conversation regarding an item in the newspaper, which alluded to the return to Valadi of the selfsame Kichu. Old memories came haunting back with the fury of an almighty monsoonal storm. The uncontrollable urge to confirm this disturbing news was what led Balaji to the aforementioned newspaper purchase. Unfortunately, the purchase did little to calm his jittery nerves. On the contrary, they became uncontrollably more agitated upon learning the unfortunate news that Kichu was indeed back, and what is more as Superintendent of Police (SP) of the district! Cold beads of terrified sweat broke out over Balaji's nervous visage and hands. Panic-stricken thoughts of revenge and retribution raced around in his exploding head. He had to puff half a dozen beedis to calm himself down.

Feet of clay nervously trudged to the police station, to report for duty. The SP's official car, a white ambassador, a fossil from the pre-independence era, was parked outside the station. Heart thumping like Mohammed Ali punching away mercilessly at an unfortunate opponent, Balaji reluctantly entered the station, hoping for the best, but fearing the worst. Kichu, whom he had readily identified from his dapper uniform at first, confirmation coming from that unmistakable ear, was seated in the thanedaar's office, sipping tea and pontificating upon official matters of palpable gravity. Their eyes met suddenly, and in that instant, quicker than a heartbeat, Kichu recognized his adolescent foe. How could he forget that parrot nose and those infernally crooked teeth that were etched onto his consciousness, not to mention his ear! The subject of many a terrifying sweat-soaked nightmare. The reason for his humiliating exodus from his dear hometown. 

Balaji steeled himself for the immediate blow as well as for the retribution that was inevitable over the long haul. Kichu had him cornered like a tiger towering over a terrified lamb. He had no option but to grin and bear it. 

To his confounded and somewhat relieved puzzlement, Kichu instead smiled. It was a kindly, openhearted smile, flashing pearly white flossed teeth, forgiving in an instant dark deeds from times long past, clearing cobwebs of guilt that had accumulated for years with a magnanimity of conscience to rival the Dalai Lama. Balaji was overcome with a shame and remorse the depths of which were impossible to fathom. He averted his guilt-laden eyes from Kichu's conciliatory gaze, not having the moral strength to meet it. Kichu rose up from his seat and walked over to his old foe, and embraced him, in a profoundly stirring gesture - taking a leaf out of the Mahatma's book so to speak. Balaji was rendered speechless, struck dumb by this wholly unanticipated act of clemency. He fell to Kichu's feet and begged for forgiveness for his adolescent sins. Kichu brushed it aside and remarked that he was thrilled to be back and to see all his old friends, and proceeded to embark on his district tour, leaving a trembling, ashen-faced, remorse-struck Balaji in his wake.

In due course of time, Kichu becoming acquainted with Balaji's remarkable powers of observation, offered him a promotion as inspector in the forensics department, in which role Balaji did full justice to the faith that was reposed in him by his most unlikely benefactor. 

The world is a small place. Think back to the number of times when you ran into a face from your past that you wanted to desperately avoid. Like a boomerang, they eventually come back to haunt you when you least expect it. In Balaji's case at least, the encounter brought good tidings and all was well that ended well.


