After the challenge, what?

I signed up for Scott's challenge a few months ago. The adrenaline of the challenge fueled me to write and publish a post every week for a few weeks. My nascent blog found a couple of followers whom my message of living in harmony with our planet resonated with. However, I ran out of steam almost as soon as the challenge was done. I lacked the self-discipline to keep the habit going, I ruefully recognized in hindsight. I should have paid heed to Scott's prescient advice to have accountability partners. I thought I knew better. I was going to ride to glory alone. On my steed, in macho style, into the glorious red sunset. Nothing of the sort happened of course and here I am no closer to my goal of making a difference than when I started the challenge. Lesson learned. Let me be right back after I wipe that egg off my smug face. Friends, please don't make the same mistake I made. Hubris is your enemy number one. Please don't let it be your guide on your journey of self-realization. 

This point was driven thunderingly home for me when I was listening to Jonathan Fields' Good Life Project podcast, which if you haven't already stumbled upon it, is pure audio gold. If you are stuck driving long distances to work like me, then I cannot think of a better use of your time than listening to Jonathan and his insightful guests. On this particular occasion, his guest was Gretchen Rubin, author and researcher. Gretchen laid out the four personality types when it came to habit formation - Upholders, Rebels, Questioners and Obligers. It was blindingly obvious to me that I was an "Obliger", someone who found it easy to meet expectations as long they weren't self-imposed. This is why I find it hard to follow through on my own ideas but have no difficulty with projects at work. The fix as it turns out is ridiculously simple. To find accountability partners! So this then is my next challenge. To be held accountable and to be a better listener. 