Ramu Somu and The Library

Oh, how I love the smell of books. Such an ingeniously simple yet profound invention that irrevocably changed the tenor of civilization. Can modern electronic gadgetry with all its distracting tomfoolery ever hope to rival the beloved reverence I feel for ancient old papyrus? Can bits and bytes ever replace the magic in the texture of pages, their thickness, color, fonts, the fascinating variety of binding styles, some books held together only with glue, some with pages stitched into little bundles glued to each other. The publisher’s page with all it’s little tidbits of interesting information, ISBN numbers, classification codes, country of printing, which is the first thing I look at by the way when I open a book. Faraway places like Singapore, USA, UK, Belgium, whose scent wafts to us through the paper. The publisher’s offices which all seem to be in New York, London, Paris, Toronto, Melbourne and Singapore. Are they all in the same buildings? 

The relentless march of technology is well and good as long as it doesn’t hoodwink us with unwanted innovations which add no value to our lives, at the expense of plundering the environment. Take the latest wave of e-readers and tablet computers which are flooding the market, threatening to eradicate the venerable printed book from the face of the earth, with lofty claims of environment friendliness. What about the environmental impact of millions of e-readers with their metric tons of non-biodegradable plastic and cardboard packaging, chips and circuitry requiring silicon and other metals to be mined from the earth’s bowels. And the devices need to be powered by electricity from hydroelectric plants fed by ecologically disastrous dams, and coal-fired plants that steam up the planet with little clue or concern for the impact to life. These devices for all the brouhaha they generate are pretty much useless without juice, more so than a roll of toilet paper which can at least be used to wipe away the remnants of last night’s dinner. You can’t share these accursed e-books either, like you can physical books, which can be a blessing as well as a curse. Take my beloved tattered, profusely underlined copy of Carl Sagan’s Cosmos, which Das uncle purported to borrow three years ago. I am still hoping he will have the decency to return it, albeit with diminishing certitude with each passing year. The suave thief. 

Books also don’t break when dropped, and make a good press for fossilizing silly infantile ornaments like the leaf with which I tickled Krishnaswamy’s ear in class and caused him to be the recipient of a sound thrashing from that sadist Ghorpade Sir, or the flower which got Chandrapal to sneeze during History class and get slapped by Mehta Sir’s old, gnarly, incredibly painful palm, harmonics from which event are resonating in his ear till the present day. And the clincher - you can’t play book cricket with Kindles and iPads in that grand theatre of tedium, Satpute Sir’s Science class, where many a tender mind has been shuttered to the beauties of science, can you, eh, eh?

Ramu found himself violently shaking poor bewildered Somu awake from a rather long and blissful slumber under the gigantic leafy umbrella of a venerable banyan tree in the neighborhood Chhatrapati Shivaji park. (All, and I mean all, public monuments, roads, schools and colleges in Shivajinagar tended to be named after Shivaji, the buccaneering Maratha warrior king, never mind the resulting disorientation amongst the citizenry). Ramu tended to get carried away with his philosophical, wildly rambling reveries sometimes, lurching from one thought to another like an orangutan in a liquor store. He had always been castigated by teachers for his impudence in asking uncomfortable questions they seldom had an answer to. Such as why public libraries were relegated to the status of second last on the state’s fiscal priority list, just above public toilets? 

This appalling, ghastly factoid which Ramu happened to come across in the greasy Shivajinagar Times sheet, which his samosas had been wrapped in, so enraged him that he felt compelled to vent his vexation on the nearest available object. That object happened to be hapless Somu who was brought crashing down to earth from his blithe fantasy world where he was on the verge of hitting the winning runs as captain of the school cricket team in the finals of the prestigious Under-10 Inter-State Cup Cricket tournament. Sadly, that thrilling fantasy vaporized microseconds before actualization and Somu was left silently seething and fuming.

At that precise instant, an electric impulse travelled at the speed of light down Ramu’s extraordinarily dense neural tracts connecting two disparate thoughts that had been milling about aimlessly until then to create the germ of an idea. Shivajinagar Public Library and Shivajinagar’s economy. The former, a ramshackle, musty, wretched looking structure whose last coat of paint was at least half a century old, a place more forgotten than the ancient Indus valley civilization, served as an asylum for geriatrics, a refuge for truants from school, a blissful sanctuary from the frenetic transactions of the external world. The latter, a ramshackle, musty, wretched looking structure whose last boom was at least half a century old, a place more forgotten than mythical towns , 



Let private companies and philanthropists subtly advertise in the library. Sponsored bookmarks, sponsored writing competitions, reading and discussion sessions of famous books. Computer
companies can sponsor computer section. Excellent advertisement for their hardware and all for a 
good cause, which will only improve their corporate image.
Payoff for advertisers - targeted intellectual audience for products like books, stationery, magazines, newspapers. Philanthropists can have library named after selves in return for lifelong patronage for fixed annual sum, adjustable for inflation. Economy gets a boost if targeted advertising results in more trade.

Spanner in the works. 
How to get government lethargocracy to buy in and grease the wheels of action? How to shake off accumulated decades old dust from the system. Pays local MP a visit. Brushed off like flies by PA. Not granted audience.

Somu pressed into action. PA’s gastronomic penchant discovered. *flesh out*. Fed idea of bust created of politico - have him inaugurate renovated library. Fame for posterity. Political payoff - in annual elections  3 yrs from now. Payoff for PA - MP’s gratitude which can lead to greater things.

Plan goes through. Library renovated. Ramu Somu bunk school and head to library. Principal Khopde in library, enjoying cool AC and reading ‘How to Discipline Truant Children’ by Albert Cane. Beat a Hasty retreat. 
