---
layout: default
title: Ramu Somu and the Ganesha Fiasco
---

### Ramu Somu and the Ganesha Fiasco

Lord Ganesha, universally revered as the ultimate facilitator, the deity whose forte is obstacle eradication, the benevolent Lord who smoothens the harsh, thorn-filled, rock-strewn pathways of life, the hallowed usherer of felicity and auspicious times. Pray then, why doesn't he teach that obnoxious inconsiderate Patel to turn the volume down on his jarring loudspeakers, whose only quality is a hair-raising, spine tingling decibel level loud enough to give hope to the deaf, while impairing those with perfectly good hearing. Not to mention scaring the living daylights out of Ramlal, the mangy street dog whose misfortune it was to have been snoozing right next to those  assault weapons. A field full of donkeys braying their lungs out would have been more tolerable than those cacophonous wooden boxes fobbed off to Patel by some charlatan. Lord Ganesha himself might have shuddered were he to descend from his celestial abode upon this godforsaken town and be subjected to this travesty. A non-stop 24x7 assault more violent than Viv Richards pulverizing overweight English bowling attacks in his pomp.

Thus wondered Ramu in the midst of a hideously jarring song during the festivities celebrating the birth of Lord Ganesha. Ramu was the intellectual half of the Ramu Somu dyad, who had earned more than their fair share of notoriety in lethargic Shivajinagar. They (Ramu actually) were not only given to posing inconvenient questions, but also had the drive and gumption to follow through the implications to their logical conclusion, which it must be said did not always yield the desired result. The religious fervor of the music, if it could be termed as such, was lost on Somu, the more practically oriented of the two, donning, as he did those rather thick cotton plugs in his ears. Somu was blessed with a temperament that did not lend itself to philosophical ramblings. He adapted himself to fit the world, and was a doer, content to leave the mental gymnastics to gear heads like Ramu.

Ramu had worked himself up into an indignant frenzy over Patel's brazen apathy to pleas to turn down the volume. The cops had also turned a deaf ear to complaints, no pun intended. Whether on account of inertia, indifference or corruption was not immediately clear. At any rate, it was obvious to Ramu that the straight path wouldn't resolve this particular situation. This left him with no recourse, but to take matters into his own hands in the interests of dharma, which was not always congruent with the law and its shambolic enforcers. 

Patel, proprietor of the sole grocery store in the neighborhood, was a portly, mustachioed, pock-marked, surly fellow with silky center-parted hair, long feminine nails painted with glossy red nail polish for reasons best known to himself, and an eternally suspicious demeanor. His lack of congeniality was challenged only by his extreme parsimony. Here was an incarnation of Scrooge with a penchant for being socially disruptive. His preferred attire was kurta and pyjama, which had been white at some point in it's history. He had just one pair, rumored to be washed once a week to minimize expenses, hygiene being the casualty. Apocryphal tales circulated about his stinginess; one being that he saved used pencils, pared down to about a centimeter long, and sold the barely usable stubs to poor students, for five paise each, a fair sum in the time warp of a Shivajinagar economy. Another ran that he went barefoot for an entire monsoon, because he didn't want to spoil his new leather sandals, and wasn't keen to fork out cash for waterproof shoes. How was it then, that he willingly paid the astronomical electric bill his loudspeakers generated? Because, it turns out, that he was a fanatic devotee of Ganesha, and allowed his fervor to trump his frugality in the festive season. But only in the festive season. 

Ramu, while loafing around the dusty bylanes of Shivajinagar, in Somu's august company, had a flash of inspiration as sudden and as powerful as a monsoon lightning bolt. Kalpesh, a servant in Patel's store was an acquaintance of Somu's, courtesy of street cricket matches. Kalpesh usually played in their team, which Ramu captained by bullying, browbeating and tyrannizing smaller, meeker boys. Docile as a cow, Kalpesh was usually relegated to fielding in the deep outfield, was never called upon to bowl, and sent in dead last to bat. Imagine his uncontrollable, feverish excitement then when Somu offered, on Ramu's behalf, to send him in as opening batsman, and give him an over or two to bowl now and then as a bonus. Of course, as free lunches usually prove chimerical, so too did this unexpected offer come with a set of strings attached. Kalpesh had to simply do the small job of snipping a set of key wires that transported current to those monstrous speakers. A quick cost-benefit analysis later, the deal was struck. 

Patel usually spent most of his time in the store. His suspicious nature didn't allow him to entrust the store to Kalpesh except for 10 minutes in the evening, when he broke for snacks at the nearby New Amar Chaat House. Kalpesh had to do his thing in those 10 minutes. At the usual time, Patel embarked on his gastronomic journey, duly locking the cash register and barking orders to Kalpesh. As soon as Patel was out the door, Kalpesh swung into action. He was a beehive of activity for the next five minutes at the end of which the speakers went quiet. The sudden silence brought Patel scurrying back. Kalpesh managed to convey genuine puzzlement and even a little disappointment. Patel had no reason to suspect his loyal employee. Ramu guessed correctly that Patel would be in no hurry to get the speakers repaired by those laggards at Lavkare Electricals, since they would never do it in time for the festivities. Patel raged and ranted, but his fury was directed at his own miserable fate rather than at anyone in particular. 

Meanwhile, an unearthly calm blanketed the neighborhood. Ramu and Somu spent an entire day of smugness, high fiving, backslapping and basking in the glow of their success. In the evening, they popped over to New Amar’s to celebrate, running into a dejected Patel, and offered their commiserations after inquiring about the radio silence. Patel, briefly distracted, soon relapsed into gloom.

The following day, Ramu and Somu were rudely awakened by religious songs from Bollywood films blared at obscene volumes from speakers that made Patel's sound like Walt Disney Concert Hall. They staggered out from bed in the direction of the screeching cacophony, and were flabbergasted to discover that workers from the Shivajinagar Sena Party had stepped in to fill the void left by Patel.











