---
layout: default
title: Sehwag
---

### Sehwag

Najafgarh Nawab. Maverick. Pocket rocket. Poor man's Tendlya. Veeru dada. Sau-wag. Veerender Thunder. Raving Sehwag (as in - he must be raving sehwag to try that shot).

Thus might run some of the myriad canned epithets that must doubtless be part of khadi clad, laptop toting (as befits these modern times), bespectacled sports journos' Virender Sehwag repertoire, as they lie in abeyance for the latest Veeru blitzkrieg to unleash itself upon bewildered, shell-shocked but secretly admiring opponents, that they may whip out their dispatches as precipitately as the UP bhaiyya whipping up bhel puri at Juhu beach, a bit of this, a dash of that, all stirred up and shaken into a scrumptiously mouth-watering repast.

Sehwag's game consists of batting reduced to its barest essentials, with a nonchalance bordering on nobility, supremely efficient, not an extra ounce of energy expended than is necessary to propel the ball towards its violent destiny. Head, hands, feet and mind held in meditative stillness while the ball is being delivered, like a leopard invisibly, soundlessly stalking its unfortunate unwary prey. And then the pounce, with hawklike speed and accuracy, faster than a hummingbird wing beat, razor sharp claws sinking into flesh and bone. Bat crashing into red leather, with the swiftness and decisiveness of a Samurai's sword, resulting in the concomitant split second deformation upon impact, further accentuated as it crashes into hoardings, at best, concrete at worst. Unfortunate victims succumbing to shock more than to injury. Worthy of mention also are the great variety of arrows in the hunter's quiver, each poison-tipped one debilitating the prey bit by little bit, be it the silky smooth square cuts spanning the full arc from slips to cover, or the wristy nonchalant flicks, or the drives that are more like indulgent caresses. Add to this the irksomely irritating ability to hit the ball all around the park into the gaps, exactly where a fielder was stationed to the previous delivery, even a vacant slip position not being spared, and you have all the tools of mental disintegration that any feline predator would be proud to possess. Sehwag is a worthy heir to the legacy of Vishwanath and Ganguly when it comes to timing a cricket ball. He is the Ramesh Krishnan of Indian cricket, touch artist extraordinaire, master exponent of death by a thousand cuts.

Sehwag, although frequently alluded to as a Tendulkar clone, is the very antithesis, the black sheep that refuses to blindly follow the mindless herd, who are all too happy to follow the shepherd with the coaching manual. He has singlehandedly made a mockery of the most cherished myths of the purists, that feet movement is imperative to successful batsmanship under all conditions, that the new ball has to be "seen off" (as if it were embarking on some somber stygian journey), that test cricket is primarily a test of spectators' forbearance. He has in the process, penned in his own irrepressible style, an alternative manual for openers, which has been denounced as blasphemous by slaves of technique and orthodoxy such as Geoffrey Boycott, that pompous bore, that monument to tedium, that crowd repellant, that modern avatar of the self-righteous 16th century clergyman insisting that the sun circles the earth. Pigheaded in their refusal to acknowledge genius, bovine in their obdurate insistence that  Sehwag's approach and technique is flawed and no youngster ought to model after him. Capping it off with boorish allegations of a lack of cranial substance. Right then, it takes a supreme intelligence to gloriously block lollipops all day long (not to mention a munificent magnanimity), to bore the opposition to tears, to bleed the last drop of joy out of the game. If a few hundred thousand seats are vacated in the bargain, it's all just part of the game. To the uninitiated mind, however, it seems straight as a Kumble leg break that technique is but a means to an end. Whatever technique delivers the end result that Sehwag delivers, pulls in the adoring masses through the turnstiles, and is sublimely aesthetic to boot, is worthy not only of merit and appreciation, but also of emulation. For results, not technique are the ultimate arbitrar of effectiveness, and by extension, greatness - as Shakespeare well knew when taking the grammatic liberties that was his wont.

More importantly, Sehwag belongs to a rare breed of Indian cricketer, in that audacity and intrepidity are as much part of his arsenal and makeup as supple wrists and a smorgasbord of shots. Where Mr.Typical Indian Batsman, all fluency and grace under no pressure, withdraws timorously into his shell, always putting safety and self before glory and team, when confronted with a challenge such as the opportunity to press for an improbable fifth day victory, Sehwag has the nerve and buccaneering spirit to go for broke. This risk-taking ability is often the difference between a drawn series and a series victory, case in point being the 2008 India v England Chennai test. Where other more illustrious names with loftier statistics would have been content to play out for a draw, Sehwag displayed the temerity to go for the near-impossible result, and the phlegmaticism and skill to pull it off. All of Tendulkar's heroics on the fifth day, as eye and crowd-pleasing as they were, would have been as improbable as the existence of an honest BMC corporator, were it not for the prior evening's bulldozing of England's hopes by the one-man Sehwag Demolition Company. It is this Houdiniesque ability to conjure up phantasmal results with alarming alacrity that is the sole dominion of Sehwag in the present Indian team, and what makes him one of the great jewels of Indian and world cricket. Another gem that stands out is his single-handed mauling of Ajantha Mendis in Sri Lanka to log the sole Indian victory in a disastrous campaign, in stark contrast to the utterly abject failure of the much ballyhooed Big 4 to decipher the recondite repertoire of the freakiest bowler in recent memory.

We will not dive too deeply into statistics, for that is not how we would like to remember Sehwag. Save to throw out the piffling matter of his 50 plus average, remarkable enough for an opening bat, who has to bat longer to earn average boosting not outs, gets to front up to the new ball when the wicket and bowlers have the most juice, and to rub salt into the wounds, gets no time to mentally prepare unlike a cushy middle-order bat. Another key statistic that is often papered over in deference to the venerable batting average, the strike rate, runs scored per 100 balls faced, offers a more intriguing insight into Sehwag's game-changing ability. Sehwag is proud possessor of the highest strike rate of 78.72 among all the openers to have ever played this exalted game since that primeval series opener in 1877. That translates into 4.68 runs per over, prodigiously plentiful by test cricketing standards. No opener in test cricket history has scored faster than Sehwag. Who then, one wonders, might have scored faster? Not very many at all it turns out, in fact, just a paltry couple! Our very own jaunty Jat, Haryana hurricane, Kapil Dev,N at 80.91, and that southpaw marauder from down under, the  flamboyant AC Gilchrist, registering a shade higher at 81.95. Not to take anything away from these two peerless entertainers and icons of the game, but their runs as aggressive as they were, came lower down the order, against softer balls and saggier shoulders and spirits. To put Sehwag's figures in perspective, the majestic "King" IVA Richards could only muster 72.26, the "mad bull" Sanath Jayasuriya sauntered in at 65.84, "rasam powered" Srikkanth limped in at 62.87, "the ox" Matthew hayden stumbled in at 60.10, and the "maestro" SR Tendulkar, hobbled in at 54.48. This combination of a 50 plus average, combined with a turbo-charged 78 plus strike rate is, as simply as it can be put, without parallel in the 130 plus year history of test cricket.  On a final note, before we are subjected to allegations of equestrian corpse flogging, how many victories or loss preventions have these ethereal qualities translated into? 36% of the times Sehwag plays, India wins. 39% of these games are drawn, while only 23% end up in defeats. Entirely acceptable, given the general reluctance of Indian teams to gamble in close situations, preferring the warm fuzzy nothingness of drawn encounters to the expenditure of a little adrenaline towards the pursuit of victory. Not to mention the age-old failing, over which countless unmentionable epithets have been hurled, hairs pulled out, teeth gnashed in rage, solemn vows to never watch another game honorably undertaken. That infuriatingly unconquerable nemesis, the inability to dislodge numbers 9,10 and 11, which often is the difference between a dud draw and a valorous victory. 

No commentary on Sehwag would be complete without a cursory mention of his gargantuan apetite for runs. It is in this aspect too that he distinguishes himself from his predecessors as belonging to a different breed of Indian batsman. Where others are content to get to triple figures, and retiring to the cool air-conditioned comfort of the hut promptly thereafter, Sehwag is like the indefatigable long distance runner who goes on and on and on, long after the flashbulbs have gone off, and the supply of encomiums run dry. The only Indian triple centurion (by extension, owner of the highest individual score by an Indian batsman in test cricket), the only batsman other than the Don and Lara to score two triple centuries in test cricket, the fastest triple centurion in test cricket, the highest number of 200 plus scores by an Indian batsman, the most consecutive scores of 150+ (11), are all a tribute to his commitment to not leave when there is unfinished business, as has been the wont of many an indolent colleague.

In the person of V Sehwag, then, we have the rarest and most effulgent of cricketing diamonds, whose dazzle is no flash in the proverbial tin pan, a worthy object of adulation and hard-earned currency, one which was almost thrown away not too long ago, but has been rather fortuituously salvaged, to the eternal gratitude and good fortune of cricketing cognoscenti and masses alike.

